<h1 align="center"><b> Second Essay </b></h1>

> Related: [HOI Notes](/tcfs-notes/HOI/README.md) | [Second Essay Plan](hoi-second-essay-plan.md)

<h1>Table of Contents</h1>

- [DOES MILL'S HARM PRINCIPLE GIVE INDIVIDUALS TOO MUCH FREEDOM IN A DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY?](#does-mills-harm-principle-give-individuals-too-much-freedom-in-a-democratic-society)
  - [1 Introduction](#1-introduction)
  - [2 Too Much Freedom Cannot be Defined](#2-too-much-freedom-cannot-be-defined)
  - [3 Harm is not Clearly Defined by Mill](#3-harm-is-not-clearly-defined-by-mill)
    - [3.1 Psychological Harm](#31-psychological-harm)
    - [3.2 Hate Speech/Discrimination](#32-hate-speechdiscrimination)
    - [3.3 Self-Regarding and Other-Regarding Conduct](#33-self-regarding-and-other-regarding-conduct)
    - [3.4 Paternalism](#34-paternalism)
  - [4 Different Limits of Freedom for Different Groups of People in Society](#4-different-limits-of-freedom-for-different-groups-of-people-in-society)
  - [5 Circular Thinking in Mill's Goals](#5-circular-thinking-in-mills-goals)
  - [6 Modern Context](#6-modern-context)
  - [7 Conclusion](#7-conclusion)
  - [REFERENCE LIST](#reference-list)
- [Feedback](#feedback)

# DOES MILL'S HARM PRINCIPLE GIVE INDIVIDUALS TOO MUCH FREEDOM IN A DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY?

## 1 Introduction
John Stuart Mill was a famous philosopher, economist, naturalist, utilitarian, empiricist, politician and liberal in the nineteenth century (Andrewes & Nield, 2020, p.4; Macleod, 2020, para1; Heywood, 2007, p.29; Perry, Chase, Jacob, Jacob & Von Laue, 2016, p.574). One of his works, *Principles of Political Economy*, highlights the roles and limitations of government, specifically within a liberal democracy. Another one of his most famous works, *On Liberty*, is a classic exposition of the liberal argument for freedom of expression (Brink, 2009, p.40). These two books propose and enforce the applications of a “very simple principle that identifies when society may limit the freedom of an individual” - the harm principle (Mill, 2020a, p.6; Mill, 2020b, p.13). In this essay, I shall argue that the question of whether or not Mill’s harm principle gives individuals too much freedom in a democratic society cannot be answered because too much freedom cannot be defined, Mill does not clearly define harm, there are different limits of freedom for different groups of people in society, there is circular thinking in Mill’s goals and when applied to modern context, the line between what is and is not harm blurs further. First the essay will explain why too much freedom cannot be defined. Next, it will show that harm is not clearly defined by Mill. Following that, it will evaluate Mill’s goals of the harm principle and demonstrate how this makes different groups in society have different limitations of freedom. Lastly, it will illustrate how, when applied in modern context, the harm principle would require much more reconstruction. `[The]`

## 2 Too Much Freedom Cannot be Defined
The harm principle is only a single part of Mill’s overall framework of liberty and government; where he believes that liberty is needed to allow for a “diversity of character and culture” that creates productive discussion and ultimately leads to what Mill believes to be social progress (Macleod, 2020, 4.6 para3; Brink, 2009, p.59). Hence, individuals should be as free as they can in order to achieve this goal (Magid, 1987, p.789). The harm principle, taken within the context of Mill’s explanations and ideologies, essentially proposes not only the parameters for what too much freedom is but also an alternative definition and purpose of liberty (Skorupski, 2006, p.39). With the principle being judged as also being a benchmark for what too much freedom could potentially be, it is impossible to determine the answer to the question unless compared with another benchmark. However, there is no universal benchmark for what too much freedom is and it would probably take a whole other essay for me to solely try to justify my own definition of too much freedom. Therefore, the question cannot be answered accurately because the phrase ‘too much freedom’ cannot be validly defined.

## 3 Harm is not Clearly Defined by Mill
Even if a justifiable benchmark for the definition of too much freedom existed, the Harm Principle itself also has several flaws. Namely, the definition of harm described by Mill is extremely vague; this leads to both direct contradictions with himself as well as contradictions among the interpretations of the text that vary so widely due to the lack of clarity in Mill’s words (Skorupski, 2006, p.43; Brink, 2009, pp.60-61).

### 3.1 Psychological Harm
Firstly, Mill does not make a clear distinction of whether or not he considers psychological harm to be genuine harm, especially when caused by speech. When reading Mill’s explanation that “mere offense” is not considered any genuine harm, one could assume that Mill condemns psychological harm (Mill, 2020a, p.11). However, Mill then makes the exception that “[n]o one is an entirely isolated being” and that “[i]t is impossible for someone to seriously or permanently harm themself without causing some harm to their family and friends, and often to others as well” (Mill, 2020a, p.11). With individuals harming themselves not posing imminent, direct, physical threats that harm their family and friends, it is difficult to understand why Mill would believe it to be viable for state interference in this scenario unless he is talking about psychological or emotional harm. Other than that, Mill provides very little evidence to suggest whether or not he condemns hateful, profane or insulting speech that could incite psychological harm. Mill does suggest an understanding that words can be just as harmful as actions as he states that “even opinions lose their freedom when they are expressed to incite behavior that would harm others” and presents the case of the “corn-dealer” (Mill, 2020a, p.9; Mill as cited in Cave, 2019, p.167; Stafford, 1998, p.95). Nevertheless, this only demonstrates that Mill does not allow for speech that includes “fighting words” that could encourage physical violence but does not detail anything regarding psychological violence (Mill, 2020a. p.9; Brink, 2009, p.55); thus, the question of whether or not Mill would condemn speech that causes psychological harm remains. Psychological harm can be just as harmful or even more harmful in comparison to physical harm. Therefore, it is unclear if Mill is considering psychological harm to be genuine harm or mere offense and unless there is clarity between that distinction, the answer of whether or not the harm principle gives individuals too much freedom cannot be determined.

### 3.2 Hate Speech/Discrimination
Following that, Mill is also unclear of whether or not he would allow for hateful or discriminatory speech that, if not causing psychological harm, may cause social harm; developing culture that robs minorities of their freedom or breaching peace among a society (Brink, 2009, pp. 56-57; Cave, 2019, pp.158-161). For instance, Mill does not allow for “white-only” carriages because it violates the rights of those who are non-white (Skorupski, 2006, p.45). This means that Mill will not allow for physical enforcement of discrimination. However, he does not present a direct reply for whether or not he would condemn discriminatory speech, such as those insulting a specific race, religion, sexual orientation or personal conviction (Warburton, 2009, p.55). He does, on the other hand, state that mere offense is not genuine harm but it is not clear how far he extends the line of offense because while some regard discriminatory speech as on the brink of offense, others, usually those on the receiving end, would regard the speech as insulting and harmful. Additionally, Mill brings in further confusion as he proposes that “intrusions”, which are a “violation of good manners”, are punishable by law; despite them not causing direct, imminent harm (Skorupski, 2006, p.45). This protruding exception is very isolated and it is unclear if discriminatory speech is considered to be a “violation of good manners”. Insulting, harmful and discriminatory speech, especially when expressed in public, could lead to skewed public opinion that affects the lives of the vulnerable groups being criticised (Cave, 2019, p.158). Unfortunately, Mill never states his distinction between mere offense and the harmful, discriminatory speech explained. Thus, it is unclear if hateful or discriminatory speech is regarded as genuine harm in the eyes of Mill and this highlights the blurred line between what is and is not harm.

### 3.3 Self-Regarding and Other-Regarding Conduct
Furthermore, Mill does not make a clear enough distinction between self-regarding and other regarding conduct. At first, Mill permits government intervention only if it serves “to prevent harm to others” or to deter a person from inflicting “evil” on someone else (Mill, 2020a, p. 6,7). Mill distinguished between conduct which “affect others”, for which a person is answerable should it result in “harm”, and conduct which merely concerns themself, over which society has no jurisdiction at all (Mill, 2020a, p.6). However, he then states that “[n]o one is an entirely isolated being”, suggesting that most, if not all, of an individual’s conduct would be considered as other-regarding; leaving a very small window for truly self-regarding acts for those who have no friend or family relations or any social relation to another human being (Stafford, 1998, p.82; Skorupski, 2006, p.48; Mill, 2020a, p.11). As such, Mill’s lack of clarity in conduct that is self-regarding versus that which is other regarding leads to a difficult division between what is and is not harm.

### 3.4 Paternalism
Lastly, Mill’s defense against paternalism is inconsistent with several of his other arguments. Mill’s rejection of paternalism is evident when he states that “identifying what is physically or morally good for someone is not an adequate reason to interfere with their freedom” because “they have an absolute right to independence” (Mill, 2020a, p.6; Mill as cited in Sokupski, 2009, p.42). As such, Mill justifies an individual’s right to consume drugs and alcohol and not wear a seatbelt because these actions are seen to only affect the individual and not others (Mill, 2020a, p.11;  Skorupski, 2006, pp.46-47; Heywood, 2007, p.31). However, as stated before, these actions can still be regarded as other-regarding as Mill states that “[n]o one is an entirely isolated being” and harm to oneself could lead to harm to others (Mill, 2020a, p.11). In addition to that, he further contradicts his justification for the consumption of drugs and alcohol as he states that “[i]f gambling, drunkenness, laziness, or uncleanliness damages an individual’s happiness and their improvement, laws should be made to prevent these behaviours and public opinion should encourage social penalties” (Mill, 2020a, p.11). These “laws...to prevent...behaviours” and “public opinion [to] encourage social penalties” can be seen as acts of paternalism as the government and society try to prevent an individual from drinking or administering drugs for their own good. He adds to the contradiction as he states that “[a] person may hurt others...by their inaction” of “fulfill[ing] their duty” and would be accountable for the injury of others (Mill, 2020a, p.7). This may suggest that if a government or an individual failed to act in order to prevent the injury of another individual, they would be accountable for that injury. As such, the notion to pass laws regarding mandatory wearing of seatbelts and limits on alcohol and drug consumption would be justified. Hence, Mill’s words with regard to paternalism are contradictorily puzzling and makes the distinction between what is and is not harm unclear.

## 4 Different Limits of Freedom for Different Groups of People in Society
Apart from Mill’s vague description of harm, he also proposes different limits of freedom for different groups of people in society. For instance, Mill states early on that the harm principle does not apply to children or to “barbarians” (Skorupski, 2009, p.42; Mill, 2020a, p.11). He implies that “barbarians” are individuals who are uneducated, rely on “alternative facts” and allow their emotions to cloud their judgement and rationality (Cave, 2019, p.158). These descriptions are relatively vague and open for interpretation as it does not state how educated an individual must be nor does it make the distinction between supposed “actual facts” and “alternative facts”. Furthermore, this suggests that Mill encourages intellectual elitism, where a select group of people with intrinsic quality, high intellect and special skills or experience would be more contributive to social progress, and therefore deserve more influence over others. Evidence of this can be found in Mill’s notion in allowing views of the minority to surface without the restriction of censorship in relation to his belief that “[g]eniuses are always likely to be a small minority” (Mill, 2020a, p.9). Thus, his emphasis on the diversity and individuality in views are actually to accommodate the “geniuses” whom he trusts are superior and are “necessary” for social progress (Mill, 2020a, p.9). The high value that he puts on intelligence is further exemplified in the Principles of Political Economy (2009, p.167), where he says that “the intelligence of the workman is [the] most important element in the productiveness of labor”. This presents the justification for the moral obligation that parents and the government have in educating its citizens (Skorupski, 2006, p.49; Mill, 2009, p.201). Therefore, Mill’s harm principle is essentially aimed for the individuals whom he believes are “geniuses” and this poses an inequality of liberties for those who are not categorically intellectual or educated; thus, the answer of whether or not Mill’s harm principle gives individuals too much freedom pivots on who the individual is.

## 5 Circular Thinking in Mill's Goals
Mill’s goal is to achieve what he believes to be social progress, where the clash in contrasting ideas lead to constructive arguments which then result in truth or at least a step closer to truth (Macleod, 2020, 4.6 para3; Brink, 2009, p.59). As such, he states that he is strictly against the censorship of opinions because they might be true or at least hold some truth and even if the opinion is completely false, it should not be censored, to prevent opinions from becoming dogma (Brink, 2009, p.45; Macleod, 2020, 4.5; Mill, 2020a, p.8; Magid, 1987, pp.788-789; Perry et al., 2016, p.574). Essentially, Mill’s commitment against censorship has exchanged the process with the goal as he places more focus on the disputation of ideas rather than the search for truth. Additionally, the complete lack of censorship that he suggests could very well be counter-productive and cause the opposite of social progress; because if the truth, at one point was achieved, Mill’s principle will force society to replace it with something false. Thus, Mill’s emphasis on the representation of alternatives and extremist ideas causes a form of circular thinking where society will never achieve his goal of truth; this is yet another flaw in Mill’s arguments that prove that the harm principle has to be refined not only to increase its clarity but also in order to meet Mill’s true goals.

## 6 Modern Context
If the harm principle were to be applied in modern context, the line between what is and is not harm would blur further, especially with regard to digital freedom of speech and expression. The environment in which Mill derived the harm principle is distinctly different from the environment that we live in today and criticising it solely due to its incompatibility with modern times would be unfair. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to try to apply the harm principle to modern-day scenarios as they deepen the holes already present in the harm principle and further highlight the complexity in defining too much freedom. For instance, the problem of hate speech, psychological harm and the distinction between offense and harm in speech becomes more prominent as the internet consists mostly of expressions of speech and not action. In addition to that, new questions would also emerge, such as the question of who is responsible for regulating websites visited by children: parents or organisations that are in-charge of the website? And would the regulation of websites for children justify censorship? Other than that, it could be said that the internet, thus far, with its lack of regulation and clarity on what is and is not too much freedom has shown a variety of outcomes that Mill predicted. An example of which is his unwanted tyranny of majority that manifests itself in self-censorship by individuals or organisations that do not want to offend or challenge the status quo and “social media bubbles” that cause an over-saturation of like-minded people who suppress the minorities among them (Cave, 2019, p.156). Yet, the limited regulation has also allowed revolutionary ideas, which might have previously been rejected among the masses, to gain awareness and become the new status quo; thus, achieving what I think Mill would regard as social progress. Therefore, although some examples and concepts from the harm principle could be interpreted for modern-day physical settings, Mill’s lack of clarity with regard to the freedom of speech proves itself to be fatal; thus, Mill’s harm principle would require substantial reconstruction for modern-day use.

## 7 Conclusion
Clearly, Mill’s “very simple principle” is not as simple as it seems (Mill, 2020a, p.6; Brink, 2009, p.61; Stafford, 1998, p.95). With Mill’s constant contradictions with himself, along with the harm principle’s incompatibility with applications to modern societies, as well as the unattainable definition of ‘too much freedom’, it is impossible to judge if Mill’s harm principle gives individuals too much freedom in a democratic society. `[Arg]`

`2680-238(citations)=2442 words`

---
## REFERENCE LIST

**Primary Sources**

Mill, J. S. (2020a).* On liberty extract.* Melbourne: Trinity College Foundation Studies.

Mill, J. S. (2009). *Principles of political economy*, abridged by J, Laurence Laughlin, 1885.

Mill, J. S. (2020b). *Principles of political economy extract*. Melbourne: Trinity College Foundation Studies.

**Secondary Sources**

Brink, D. O. (2009). Mill’s liberal principles and freedom of expression. In C. L. Ten (Ed.), *Mill’s On Liberty: A critical guide* (pp. 40-61). Leiden: Cambridge University Press.

Cave, P. (2019). *The myths we live by: Adventures in democracy, free speech and other liberal inventions*. London: Atlantic Books.

Heywood, A. (2007). *Political ideologies: An introduction.* Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.

Macleod, C. (2020). "John Stuart Mill", *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* (Summer 2020 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives
/sum2020/entries/mill/>.     

Magid, H. M. (1987). John Stuart Mill. In L. Strauss & J. Cropsey (Eds.), *History of political philosophy* (pp. 784–801). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Perry, M., Chase, M., Jacob, J., Jacob, M., & Von Laue, T. (2016). *Western civilization: Ideas, politics & society.* Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Skorupski, J. (2006). *Why read Mill today?* London: Routledge.

Stafford, W. (1998). *John Stuart Mill*. Houndmills: Macmillan.

Warburton, N. (2009). *Free Speech: A very short introduction.* Oxford: Oxford University Press.

# Feedback
| Criteria     |        Mark        | Comments |
| :----------- | :----------------: | :--|
| Thesis       | Excellent(5/5) 10% | `[The]` A fantastic thesis statement that clearly articulates what you intend to argue and how you intend to argue it. |
| Argument     | Excellent(5/5) 25% | `[Arg]` This conclusion is too short and lacking in detail. Remember, your conclusion should begin with a more sophisticated version of your thesis statement.|
| Evidence     | Excellent(5/5) 25% | - |
| Evaluation   | Excellent(5/5) 20% | `[Eva]` Good|
| Bibliography | Excellent(4.25/5) 10% | `[Bib]` You have not italicised the titles of the books in your Reference List. All book titles must appear in italics.|
| References   |  Good(5/5) 10%  | - |
| **TOTAL**    |       99/100       | Well, what can I say? Absolutely brilliant! Fantastically argued, with an incredibly clear and logical structure. Huge amounts of evidence that are used well and some very clever insights. Obviously, way too long, but you know... Anyway, absolutely fantastic. You should be incredibly proud of this. Well done!|