<h1 align="center"><b> Poetry Essay </b></h1>

> Related: [LIT Notes](/tcfs-notes/LIT/README.md) | [Poetry Essay Plan](lit-poetry-essay-plan.md)

<h1> Table of Contents </h1>
<details>
  <summary>Table of Contents</summary>
  
- [The Tuft of the Flowers Poetry Essay](#the-tuft-of-the-flowers-poetry-essay)
- [Feedback](#feedback)
</details>

# The Tuft of the Flowers Poetry Essay
> Question: Robert Frost’s poem ‘The Tuft of the Flowers’ shows us that humans are never really separate from each other. Discuss.

The word ‘separate’ is used to describe things or people that are completely disconnected or detached from each other; thus, existing or living in isolation and loneliness. However, people are never really separate when they may seem disconnected or apart, but are actually connected in some way, whether it be physically, mentally or spiritually. In this essay I will argue that Robert Frost’s poem “The Tuft of the Flowers” shows the reader that no matter how isolated we may seem to be in the world, we are never truly alone because humanity is always connected by the similarities that we have with each other; mostly focusing on the spiritual similarities of how humans are bonded by the emotions, feelings and experiences that we have. First the essay will investigate the spiritual journey which the speaker takes and the change that the speaker goes through, next it will analyse what the butterfly and the flowers symbolise in the poem and finally it will analyse the poem structure. `[great intro, but the last item you list seems somewhat adrift…]`

The beginning of the poem creates a heightened sense of isolation `[we don't see the mower doing this]` and a melancholic theme of loneliness. This is evident in the second couplet when the mower uses his scythe to create a “leveled scene” that shows how nature had been wiped `[changes the metaphor]` clean by man and signifies how lonely the speaker is in the field; being the only one erect `[in a landscape of…]` a mass land of destruction and death. After that, the speaker seeks communication as he “looked” and “listened” for the mower but is then met with silence `[also virtual]`; further illustrating his isolation. Couplet four then further emphasises the theme of loneliness as a caesura, “-”, is used not only to bring more focus to the word “alone” but also to make the word separated other parts of the poem; pushing it away to its isolated spot at the end of line eight `[nice]`. By the end of the first few couplets of the poem, the speaker comes to a grim, philosophical conclusion of how humans are never truly together and we inevitably, “must” be alone. However, the second part of the poem,`[no comma]` replaces all ideas from the first part and clarifies the togetherness of humanity and how humans are never truly separate. This is evident as the rhyme of “heart” and “apart” from couplet five is repeated in couplet twenty-one. In couplet five, the ideas of the speaker were said “within [his] heart”. The word “within” shows that these ideas were reflected introspectively to himself and not aloud to the outside world. This signifies that this idea was just a temporary state of mind; a thought that comes and goes and is not a true belief of his, which he would release outward into the world. In couplet twenty-one, the ideas of the speaker were said “from the heart”; an allusion to a biblical saying that means that he genuinely believes in what he is saying aloud. This proves that the reiteration puts emphasis on the latter beliefs rather than the prior ones as the speaker has changed his mind and has now discovered the truth that humans are always connected even if they may seem apart. `[a very good, subtle but important observation of the language]` Therefore, the contrast between the first and second parts of the poem creates more emphasis on latter ideas of connectedness and unity. 

The speaker and mower’s connection of mutual appreciation for natural beauty is represented by the flowers and was prompted by the butterfly, which is was `[cut was]`  like a spiritual guide to the speaker. The butterfly is introduced in couplet six of the poem which starts with the word “[b]ut”; signifying a break in the melancholic tone from before and foreshadows a possible change that is to come. `[good]` From couplets six through eleven, the butterfly is in the role of a spiritual guide as the speaker follows the it `[?]`, which physically “led [his] eye” to the tuft of flowers and spiritually lead him to the truth about humanity. Butterflies undergo the process of metamorphosis from a caterpillar to a butterfly, which is like the change in which the speaker goes through in the story `[nice point]` : from a negative, pessimistic view to a positive, optimistic one. The butterfly has already gone through its transformation and is leading the speaker through his; thus, further illustrating its role as a spiritual guide. `[well put]` The tuft of flowers that the speaker is led to are metaphorically described as a “leaping tongue of bloom”; communicating answers to the “questions that have no reply” and relaying “messages” from the mower. `[a nicely constructed sentence, integrating quotes smoothly]` The answers and messages are the feelings of the mower: his appreciation for the beauty of the flowers. `[yes]` This appreciation evident in couplet twelve as the juxtaposition between the harsh “b” sounds from “bloom”, “beside”, “brook” and “bared”, and the “s” sounds from “scythe” and “spared” illustrates that the mower, who has done so much destruction thus far, actually has a soft side that values nature and spares the flowers. `[interesting reading of the sounds…]` The speaker clearly shares the same appreciation and feels connected to the mower as the poem now uses pronouns “us” and “ours” showing the sense of unity that he feels. `[very good]` Additionally, this connection is shown through the awakening of the speaker’s senses as before, when he “looked” and “listened”, he was met with silence but now he could “hear the wakening birds around” and “his long scythe whispering on the ground”. This rich imagery highlights the awareness of beauty in life and surroundings that the speaker now has. `[excellent commentary]` Furthermore, the tuft of flowers was found “beside a brook”, which is a stream of water; similar to a river that flows through cities and towns that are miles apart and connects them. The “brook” therefore symbolises the connection between people – the connection between the mower and the speaker. [well observed] Other than that, the connection is further highlighted by the word “kindred”, which has connotations of family, fellowship and togetherness. `[good]` Thus, the tuft of flowers becomes a symbol of unity between the speaker and the flowers. The speaker recognises the feelings and emotions that drove the mower to spare the flowers and feels a bond between his values and the mower’s values. Therefore, the poem illustrates the butterfly as a spiritual guide that leads the speaker to the flowers, that represent the bond between people through their values and emotions. `[excellent]`

Frost also illustrates the paradox of unity in isolation through the form of the poem. The poem is made up of 42 lines paired into 21 couplets with the rhyme scheme aa, bb, cc. Thus, even though the couplets may be separated from each other, no line is ever truly alone. Every line always has another line of the same rhyme paired with it; similar to how every person in the world will always find some sort of similarity within themselves reflected onto someone else. `[very nice]` Other than that, the poem has an iambic pentameter of stressed and unstressed syllables like the rhythm of a heartbeat. This is symbolic to the unity in humanity as the heart is not only the organ that beats within the chest of every living human, but it also represents the human emotions that we all share. Therefore, the themes of the poem can actually be reflected on the poem’s structure. `[a lovely poetic observation]` 

Robert Frost’s poem, “The Tuft of Flowers” reminds the reader that even if circumstances may force us to be physically distant from each other, humanity is always connected in one way or another: from our physiological similarities to the emotions that we share.

`[1239 words]`

# Feedback

A very sensitive, intelligent and well-informed discussion of this poem. And you maintain a very strong focus on the specific essay question. 

I have been a little bit picky with my comments in the earlier part of the essay, not because there are very significant problems, but because you are writing at a level where the finer increments towards excellence are available to you.  

The way that you are identifying and interpreting the dynamics of the poetic language is impressive: you are able to ground claims which involve sophisticated concepts in the language itself, and explain your reasoning process very clearly but without losing a sense of engagement.  

A pleasure to read.

95/100