<h1 align="center"><b> The White Tiger Essay </b></h1>

> Related: [LIT Notes](/tcfs-notes/LIT/README.md) | [The White Tiger Essay Plan](lit-twt-essay-plan.md)

<h1>Table of Contents</h1>

- [The White Tiger Essay](#the-white-tiger-essay)
- [Feedback](#feedback)

# The White Tiger Essay
> Question: Question: In The White Tiger, Balram sees himself as simply moving from Darkness into Light, 
but it is not that simple. Discuss. 

Balram introduces his idea of Light and Darkness early on in the book; describing them solely as geographical places in India. However, by the end of the book, Balram associates `[yes, 'associates' is a good concept to use]` various conditions and behaviours to Light and Darkness; with Light associated with virtue, wealth  and values of morality, and Darkness associated with poverty, disgust and immorality. In this essay, I shall argue that although Balram has in some ways transitioned from Darkness to Light, this transition is not simply binary because the line between Darkness and Light is not clearly defined. First, I will examine Balram’s relationship with Ashok and demonstrate the ways in which Balram has moved from Darkness to Light. Next, I will analyse various examples of dualism displayed in the novel and show that Balram’s simple axioms, specifically regarding freedom and morality, are not always true; thus, blurring the line between the contrasting ideas of Darkness and Light. `[nice intro]` 

Balram clearly believes that he has transitioned from Darkness to Light as he writes, “ You see, I am in the Light now, but I was born and raised in Darkness” and “I have switched sides” (Adiga, 2008, p.14, 320). `[good quotes]` This belief is also backed by evidence as we watch Balram physically relocate from Laxmangarh; a place of Darkness, near the “river of Death” (Adiga, p.14) that chokes, stunts and consumes its inhabitants into a never ending cycle of suffering and poverty; to Bangalore, a place of Light, a city where technology is flourishing and opportunities pop up constantly. Additionally, Balram also physically and mentally changes himself to be a man in the Light, by growing closer and eventually replacing his master, Ashok. The evolution of Balram and Ashok’s relationship is like a quirky, romantic dance `[good idea]`. The two characters start out very distant: Ashok not knowing Balram’s name and Balram being extremely obedient and loyal to his master. The gap grows closer `[diminishes]` as both Ashok and Balram break the rules of their castes; with Ashok letting his guard down and showing empathy and sympathy and Balram breaking his loyalty with Ashok with lies. Their Light and Darkness intertwine with each other as Ashok’s and Balram’s behaviours change. Balram copies, imitates and clones `[what do you mean by this last word, 'clones'?]` Ashok’s mannerisms, looks and mentality through the rearview mirror; that acts as both his lens into the Light and also an aid to his imitation `[excellent literary point]` game; eventually being able to see the world through the eyes of those in the Light - regarding those in the Darkness as “monkeys” (Adiga, 2008, p.200), saying the phrase “How stupid can you people get?” (Adiga, 2008, p.191, 204) and practicing the words “pizza” and “mall” over and over again. As Balram floats closer to the Light, Ashok spirals down a hole of Dark depression. Lastly, they trade places as Balram forces Ashok out of the car, into the Darkness and kills him. There is a clear parallel between the evolution of the Balram and Ashok’s relationship and Balram’s transition from Darkness to Light; as the relationship between Ashok and Balram tightens, Balram perceives himself as becoming closer to the Light, eventually reaching it when he murders Ashok `[yes, and Balran also talks about the intimate connection between a murderer and his victim...]`. Although Balram’s change in location and behaviour are the two prominent examples that strengthen the idea of a simple transition from Darkness to Light, there is also evidence that suggests otherwise. `[not sure that this last sentence clearly concludes the paragraph...]` 

There are many uses of dualism in the poem `[novel]` that are parallel with Balram’s idea of Light and Darkness: two Indias; “two castes: Men with Big Bellies and Men with Small Bellies”; “two destinies: eat or get eaten up”; “two markets”; two sizes: skinny and fat;two problems: malnutrition and “excess weight”; two educations: “half-baked” and “fully-formed”; two hospitals: public and private; two Delhi's: “Old Delhi” and “New Delhi”; two freedoms: one with choices and one without; two choices: moral or immoral; and, for the most part, two people: Balram and Ashok (Adiga, 2008, p.11, 14, 64, 203, 219, 223, 225, 252). These dualities suggest that there are only two sides and that every action, idea or person can be easily and simply categorised into one of the two sides. However, this is not the case, especially when it comes to freedom and morality. `[very acute conceptual analysis]` 

Freedom is something that Balram values highly and hunts furiously `[apt metaphor for the white tiger!]` for. This is evident from the very first chapter of the book as he states his admiration for the Chinese, who he believes are “great lovers of freedom and individual liberty” `[this is a hugely ironic comment, since modern China has neither freedom nor individual liberty – it is joke which Adiga would expect all of his readers to get (except perhaps those who have passed through CCP indoctrination...)]`(Adiga, 2008,  p.5). Another example is shown in his analogy of the Rooster Coop that highlights the fact that the poor are trapped in poverty and Darkness; thus, strengthening his goal to escape the coop for freedom. Balram believes that he is free after the murder of Ashok as he writes, “I was a free man” (Adiga, 2008, p.285). This phrase, however ,was coupled with the phrase “I was blind” before it (Adiga, 2008, p.285). The words “blind” and “free” have contrasting connotations and this juxtaposition undermines Balram’s sense of freedom `[yes indeed]`; perhaps suggesting that he has not actually gained freedom, just a different form of imprisonment that he cannot see as clearly or one that he is ignorant to - imprisonment from the truth and reality. Balram holds a strong belief that the rich and wealthy are free because they have the choice to be good if they want to.  However, even in the Light, men are never truly free, due to the ladder of hierarchy `[the two words mean the same thing]` in place in society. Balram’s simple model of two Indias, two castes and two destinies is demolished by the hierarchy of control shown in the book, where although people at the top are controlling those at the bottom, through blackmail and values of family, the hierarchy can easily be rearranged `[well put]`. For example, Ashok’s family was being treated like the “slaves'' of politicians, threatened by hierarchies above them and are trying to survive (Adiga, 2008, p.106). In addition to that, Balram is also ignorant of the fact that people of the Light cannot actually live a life of ‘good’ and ‘morality’ if they intend to survive. Evidence of this can be found when Ashok is barricaded from leaving the corrupt coal business by his family as well as his horrific faith `[fate]` that is directly related to his good will and intentions for doing good and being moral. This proves that people of the Light are not free to do whatever they want and have to adhere to rules too. Furthermore, in some ways, Ashok sees Balram as having more freedom than he does, somewhat envying his simple life `[probably need to qualify this observation]`. In conclusion, freedom is a mythical, unattainable goal in the book; no one is truly free - not those in the Darkness nor those in the Light; therefore, as the line between who is and is not free blurs, so does the line between Darkness and Light. `[good paragraph]` 

Other than that, the idea of morality is also one that is heavily challenged in the book. One of the most signifiant events that show this is the murder of Ashok. On the surface, it is can easily be said that murder and stealing are immoral. Yet, the line of morality is no longer that simple as Balram’s justifications for murder were rather rational; if he did not do what he did, there would have also been very serious consequences for himself - it was an act of survival and an act of justice `[yes, well put]`. Furthermore, when looking at the broader picture, this is just one of many murders that occur in the book; others include: the death of Balram’s father can be considered a murder from the corrupt doctors and officials, the police brutally killing the man who wanted to vote, the murder of millions in poverty by men of wealth as they deprive them from basic needs that people of the Light can clearly afford and turning them into “human spiders” that live in horrible, unhealthy conditions and lead miserable lives which end in them spewing blood out of their lungs `[yes]`. Thus, with people similar to Ashok being responsible for the death of so many, it can be argued that Balram had the right to kill. This concept of violence and death being justifiable is further strengthened by ideas of justice and revolution through the mention of Castro, a Cuban revolutionary “who threw the rich out of his country and freed his people'' and Balram’s thoughts about “civil war” and “blood on the streets” (Adiga, 2008, p.95, 221). Events like the French Revolution and American Revolution and concepts of sending patriotic soldiers to fight for freedom, despite their involvement in killing a lot of people, are generally accepted across the world because it can somewhat be seen as sacrifices for the greater good. It is obvious that Balram took inspiration from such events that are considered somewhat moral and even encouraged; thus showing readers that the conflicting ideas of morality make it hard to judge Balram’s actions `[excellent points]`. Another example that challenges morality is Balram’s wilful decision to side with and become the Devil; arguing that it was the only way to escape the horrible place that God built - the Darkness. This idea severely contrasts with the conventional views of God and the Devil, forcing readers to think outside the binary of morality `[great point!]`. Lastly, the question of whether or not Balram’s actions are regarded as moral or immoral is never clearly answered in the book. This is to show readers the reality of morality, where we are all entangled in a web of complexity where morality can never clearly be defined and many concepts that have been labelled as good or bad and moral and immoral can be contradictory to one another. Therefore, with the line of morality being unclear, so does the line between Darkness and Light; thus, strengthening the idea that although in some ways Darkness and Light exist, there are many other ways in which it does not. 

In The White Tiger, Balram is not just simply moving from Darkness to Light because the determining differences between them, namely freedom and morality, are not as simple and clear-cut as they seem.  

`[1682 words]`

# Feedback
An excellent discussion. You show a string ability to make fine conceptual distinctions, and also sensitive and lucid literary observations.

99/100