<h1 align="center"><b> Othello Essay </b></h1>

> Related: [LIT Notes](/tcfs-notes/LIT/README.md) | [Othello OneNote (PDF)](lit-othello-onenote.pdf)

```
“The cause of the tragic events in Othello is the way the society views women.” Discuss.
```

Shakespeare’s Othello is staged in a male-dominated world, which was not unlike the society it was performed before and arguably not unlike the society we live in today. Although many factors can be attributed as the cause of Othello’s tragedy, from the easily-manipulated nature of an outsider to the power of emotions such as jealousy, the impact and role of gender in Othello is placed above all else because it can be argued that if all the women in the play were men or if women were treated as equal as men in the society, that the play would no longer be a tragedy. In this essay, I shall contend that the tragic events in Othello stem from the way the society in Othello views women. First, I shall examine the ways in which women are objectified and analyse how the reduction of women to objects increases the dominance of men in the society. Next, I will demonstrate the ways in which prejudice against women in the society caused them to be treated with suspicion. Finally, I evaluate the ways in which these views are internalised and conditioned into the female characters in the play and how this causes the tragic events of Othello.

Throughout the play of Othello, women are expected to confine themselves to their gender roles and are idealised to be the obedient dolls for the men to play with, to use and to break. This is evident as women are referred to as being men’s possessions; such as Desdemona being “your white ewe”, suggesting that she is Brabantio’s property or being a prize or commodity that was “ta’en away” and “won” by Othello. The way in which women are treated is also exemplified by a quote from Emilia as she says,“They are all but stomachs, and we all but food; / They eat us hungerly, and when they are full, / They belch us.”. This metaphorical phrase, which demonstrates how women are used to feed men’s hunger for sexual pleasure, further emphasises the objectification of women in the society as being mere things for sexual enjoyment and not much else other than that.  These remarks degrade women from being the intellectual, rational human beings that they are to mere objects that serve specific purposes for men. This degradation of women drives Othello’s jealousy as he believes that Desdemona cannot show affectionate feelings towards anyone else except for him because she is his Desdemona - his “delicate creature”. This possessive nature is also evident in Othello’s soliloquy in acts 5 scene 2 as he wants to preserve Desdemona’s physical features, such as “that whiter skin of hers than snow” and erase what her corrupt conscience by “[putting] out [her] light”. He wants to turn her into the woman of his fantastical dreams; an object which stays cold as “snow”, static and unchanging: his perfect doll. Therefore, the society’s view of women as mere objects leads to Othello’s obsession with obtaining the perfect woman for himself and leads to the tragic event of Desdemona’s death. 

Other than that, women in Shakespeare’s Venetian society were treated with raised suspicion as the society had ingrained prejudices and gender stereotypes against women. This is evident when Brabantio says, “Fathers, hence trust not your daughters’ minds” as he believed that Desdemona has deceived him as she has suddenly done this “gross revolt”. However, when analysed further, it can be argued that Desdemona has not been deceiving her father and has just been in a constant state of denial up till this point. Evidence of this can be seen when he says “this accident is not unlike my dream”, meaning that Brabantio did witness the signs of love between Desdemona and Othello and although he has been actively trying to oppress those thoughts, his subconscious still knows the truth as it appears in his dream. Thus, Brabantio is just accusing women of being stereotypical, mythical creatures with alternative motives because of his preconceived notions about women. Additionally, prejudice against women can also be seen within the society as Iago makes misogynistic comments of Cassio being a “spinster”, which is an older, unmarried woman and , which further appealed to the dramatic irony. These misogynistic notions against women can also be seen in the pivotal moment when Emilia tells Othello that he is engulfed by a feeling of jealousy and that Desdemona is innocent but Othello refuses to believe her. Othello’s choice to believe Iago over Emilia is one that has very little evidence to back itself unless it were based on misogynistic assumptions. It is thus clear that due to societal prejudice, Othello trusts men with less evidence and rationale than women with more evidence and rationale to their claims. Hence, if prejudices against women were not ingrained into the minds of the characters, the events of the play would have ended up very differently and maybe the tragedy would not be one.

Furthermore, the women in the play have internalised these patriarchal beliefs that the society has. This is evident when Desdemona says “Alas, she has no speech” demonstrating that she does not only watch but contributes to the abusive relationship between Iago and Emilia. Furthermore, women in the society had conditioned themselves to adhere to the expectations but upon them to be obedient dolls for their husbands. This leads to Desdemona falling from the “Captain’s captain” to accepting her unfortunate fate scenes before it actually happens as she has subscribed to the objectified view of women in society. Ultimately, the internalised patriarchy of women in the society cannot be seen clearer than when Desdemona says “Nobody; I myself” and blames herself for her death despite it being a murder. The fact that Desdemona does not blame anyone for her death but herself further emphasises the fact that women in the play, and thus in society, have unfortunately been conditioned to accept their place in a patriarchal society. Therefore, it can be said that if women were not suppressed by society, they would not have suppressed themselves and condone such behaviour against them; if these patriarchal thoughts were not ingrained into Desdemona, more assertive actions by the women would have been taken and this may have lead to different outcomes in the play. Thus, women’s internalisation of patriarchal beliefs lead to the tragic events in Othello. 

Women are clearly not seen as equal to men in the play as it reflected the way in which women were treated in society not only in Shakespeare’s time but in the present day. In conclusion, the society’s patriarchal, misogynistic views of women caused the tragic events in Othello.

`1100 words`